Goal of the Competition
The goal of this competition is to detect freezing of gait (FOG), a debilitating symptom that afflicts many people with Parkinson’s disease. You will develop a machine learning model trained on data collected from a wearable 3D lower back sensor.

Your work will help researchers better understand when and why FOG episodes occur. This will improve the ability of medical professionals to optimally evaluate, monitor, and ultimately, prevent FOG events.

Context
An estimated 7 to 10 million people around the world have Parkinson’s disease, many of whom suffer from freezing of gait (FOG). During a FOG episode, a patient's feet are “glued” to the ground, preventing them from moving forward despite their attempts. FOG has a profound negative impact on health-related quality of life—people who suffer from FOG are often depressed, have an increased risk of falling, are likelier to be confined to wheelchair use, and have restricted independence.

While researchers have multiple theories to explain when, why, and in whom FOG occurs, there is still no clear understanding of its causes. The ability to objectively and accurately quantify FOG is one of the keys to advancing its understanding and treatment. Collection and analysis of FOG events, such as with your data science skills, could lead to potential treatments.

There are many methods of evaluating FOG, though most involve FOG-provoking protocols. People with FOG are filmed while performing certain tasks that are likely to increase its occurrence. Experts then review the video to score each frame, indicating when FOG occurred. While scoring in this manner is relatively reliable and sensitive, it is extremely time-consuming and requires specific expertise. Another method involves augmenting FOG-provoking testing with wearable devices. With more sensors, the detection of FOG becomes easier, however, compliance and usability may be reduced. Therefore, a combination of these two methods may be the best approach. When combined with machine learning methods, the accuracy of detecting FOG from a lower back accelerometer is relatively high. However, the datasets used to train and test these algorithms have been relatively small and generalizability is limited to date. Furthermore, the emphasis has been on achieving high levels of accuracy, while precision, for example, has largely been ignored.

Competition host, the Center for the Study of Movement, Cognition, and Mobility (CMCM), Neurological Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, aims to improve the personalized treatment of age-related movement, cognition, and mobility disorders and to alleviate the associated burden. They leverage a combination of clinical, engineering, and neuroscience expertise to: 1) Gain new understandings into the physiologic and pathophysiologic mechanisms that contribute to cognitive and motor function, the factors that influence these functions, and their changes with aging and disease (e.g., Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s). 2) Develop new methods and tools for the early detection and tracking of cognitive and motor decline. A major focus is on using leveraging wearable devices and digital technologies; and 3) Develop and evaluate novel methods for the prevention and treatment of gait, falls, and cognitive function.

Your work will help advance the evaluation, understanding and treatment of FOG, improving the lives of the many people who suffer from this debilitating Parkinson’s disease symptom.

Acknowledgments
The competition data was collected by three research groups:

The Center for the Study of Movement, Cognition and Mobility, as indicated above,

The Neurorehabilitation Research Group at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven in Belgium, and the

Mobility and Falls Translational Research Center at the Hinda and Arthur Marcus Institute for Aging, affiliated with Harvard Medical School in Boston.

The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research generously supported the data collection and this data competition.